JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: From
conflicts
of interest to climate change,
president-elect
Trump goes on the record with
The New York
Times.
We talk with Trump's senior
adviser, Kellyanne
Conway.
And we meet the man challenging
Nancy Pelosi
for leadership of the Democratic
Party in
the U.S. House of
Representatives.
Then: how the mother of a dead
ISIS fighter
battles to end radicalization in
Europe.
NICOLA BENYAHIA, Mother of
Killed ISIS Fighter:
Maybe that anger is, I'm using
it as a strength
to kind of hit back at them and
say, no, you
are not taking any more of our
children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Donald Trump
is off to Florida tonight for
the long Thanksgiving
weekend, and he's trailing
headlines in his
wake.
He sat down today at The New
York Times for
an extensive, live-tweeted
question-and-answer
session.
Julie Davis, who covers the
White House, was
one of The Times reporters in
the meeting
with Mr. Trump, and she joins me
now.
Julie Davis, welcome back to the
"NewsHour."
So, this was an
on-again/off-again session,
wasn't it?
JULIE DAVIS, The New York Times:
This was.
We had planned for it to be from
1:00 to 2:00
today, and then we found out via
tweet early
this morning that Mr. Trump had
decided to
cancel.
But shortly thereafter, within a
couple more
hours, he tweeted again, and we
heard from
our business and editor
colleagues here at
The Times that it was back on.
So, we all did get to sit down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was partly
over whether
it was on the record or not; is
that right?
JULIE DAVIS: That's right, yes.
He had agreed to sit down with
us on the record.
He met briefly with the
publisher for a few
moments beforehand off the
record, and had
said earlier on Twitter that he
wanted -- that
we had changed the ground rules
at the last
moment and he was canceling,
when, in fact,
he was the one who asked that it
be off the
record and didn't want to show
up unless it
was.
But we did end up getting to
terms, and it
was on the record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you have
been following
what he has been saying quite a
while.
What did you think stood out?
JULIE DAVIS: Well, the Donald
Trump we saw
today here at The Times was a
different tone
and some different positions
than what we
heard on the campaign trail.
We asked him about prosecuting
Hillary Clinton,
which was a favorite chant of
his supporters
on the campaign trail.
He said he wasn't really
interested in doing
that.
He wanted to get past the
election, it was
very divisive and he really had
no interest
in that.
So that was new.
He also backed off of his
insistence that
the United States should begin
water-boarding
terror suspects again.
He said he's spoken to General
Mattis, who
he has been considering for his
secretary
of defense, and he says
essentially that water-boarding
doesn't work and that he's
inclined to buy
that assessment.
So that was new.
And he also said that he
wouldn't necessarily
rip up the Paris climate accord,
which is
something that he's really been
railing against
or had been railing against as a
candidate.
So there was a lot that was new.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet when -- I
gather from
the reporting of The Times, when
reporters
pressed him on his business
arrangements and
how those might be affected when
he becomes
president, he was pretty
insistent on his
position on that.
What did he say about that?
JULIE DAVIS: Well, he
essentially said -- you
know, we asked him about whether
he would
liquidate his business.
He said: Well, I really can't.
It's real estate.
You can't just sell things off.
And essentially his point was:
As president,
I'm not really bound by any of
the ethics
rules.
There is no such thing as a
conflict of interest
if you're president, which, if
you look at
the letter of the rules, may be
true.
But when we pressed him on what
he would do
to comply with the spirit of the
rules, which
he should he would want to do --
he said:
I don't have to do anything, but
I would like
to do something to give the
appearance that
there isn't a conflict -- he
really couldn't
be nailed down on that.
And he wouldn't say specifically
if there
was any one thing that he would
be willing
to submit to as president that
would ensure
to the American people that he
is dividing
his role as president from his
business role
as the head of this real estate
and business
empire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the other
thing -- one
of the other things The Times
reporters pressed
him on was the so-called
alt-right movement,
the connection of his senior
adviser Steve
Bannon to that movement.
What did he have to say about
that?
JULIE DAVIS: Well, he very
forcefully defended
Steve Bannon.
He said he's a decent guy, he's
been treated
unfairly, and if he held any of
those views,
if he, Mr. Trump, thought that
Steve Bannon
was a racist or an anti-Semite,
that of course
he would never have hired him,
and if he heard
him say anything or made any
decisions along
those lines, that he would be
out.
He also was asked to and he did
disavow the
alt-right gathering, the Nazi
supporters gathering
in D.C., which happened over the
weekend.
He said: If those people are
encouraged by
me, I don't want that and I'm
not asking that.
And he said he very strongly
condemned and
disavowed that.
So, we haven't seen him do it on
Twitter.
And in some other venues, he has
been less
vocal about it, but certainly
today at this
meeting he was very -- he was
adamant that
those are not views he tolerates
and he doesn't
believe that Mr. Bannon holds
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reporter Julie
Davis, after
Donald Trump, the
president-elect Trump, had
a long and extended talk with
New York Times
reporters today in New York,
thank you, Julie
Davis.
JULIE DAVIS: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can find
more online,
where you can read the live
tweets from The
New York Times meeting.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And we will hear from Trump
senior adviser
Kellyanne Conway right after the
news summary.
In the day's other news:
President Obama commuted
the sentences of another 79
federal prisoners
today, taking him over the 1,000
mark.
The White House says that's more
than the
last 11 chief executives
combined.
Mr. Obama has focused on
nonviolent drug offenders,
arguing that it makes no sense
for them to
serve long prison terms.
A federal judge in Texas has
blocked a rule
making more than four million
workers eligible
for overtime pay.
The U.S. Labor Department
regulation was set
to take effect December 1, but
21 states sued
to stop it.
The rule mandates overtime for
anyone making
less than about $47,000.
That's double the current
standard.
A school bus driver in
Chattanooga, Tennessee,
will face charges of vehicular
homicide in
Monday's crash that left five
young children
dead.
Authorities say Johnthony Walker
was going
well over the speed limit when
the bus smashed
into a tree.
Crews at the crash site removed
the wreckage
today, and the National
Transportation Safety
Board sent a team to
investigate.
CHRISTOPHER HART, Chairman,
National Transportation
Safety Board: We certainly send
our condolences
to the parents of those
children.
My daughter rides a school bus
every day.
I understand that.
We will do everything we can to
try to prevent
this from happening again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A dozen
schoolchildren were
still hospitalized today, six of
them in intensive
care.
Walker is scheduled to appear in
court early
next week.
A San Antonio man says that he
was angry about
a child custody fight before he
allegedly
shot a police officer.
Otis McKane was arrested Monday,
a day after
Detective Benjamin Marconi was
ambushed in
his police car.
McKane answered questions from
reporters last
night as he was being taken to
jail.
He said he didn't know Marconi.
OTIS MCKANE, Suspect: I have
been through
several custody battles, and I
was upset at
the situation I was in.
And I lashed out at somebody who
didn't deserve
it.
QUESTION: Do you have anything
to say to his
family?
OTIS MCKANE: I'm sorry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: McKane now faces
a capital
murder charge.
In Turkey, a sweeping purge
ensnared another
15,000 soldiers, police and
civil servants
today.
It's part of President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan's
expanding crackdown since last
summer's failed
coup attempt.
More than 38,000 people have
been jailed,
and more than 100,000 ousted
from their jobs.
General Motors will be allowed
to delay recalling
millions of vehicles in the U.S.
for potentially
defective air bags.
The National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
agreed to the unusual move
today.
It includes 6.8 million older
model pickups
and SUVs.
GM has argued that the Takata
air bag inflators
in those vehicles are, in fact,
safe.
The company now has until August
of next year
to prove it.
And on Wall Street, the
post-election market
rally cracked yet another
barrier.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 67
points to close above 19000 for
the first
time.
The Nasdaq rose 17, and the S&P
500 added
four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
we talk to
Trump aide Kellyanne Conway and
the man challenging
Nancy Pelosi to lead House
Democrats; plus,
a mother's struggle after her
son left home
to join ISIS; and much more.
The Trump transition team is in
its second
week of work preparing to take
over the White
House and begin the next
administration.
To discuss what's ahead, we turn
to Kellyanne
Conway, former campaign manager
and senior
adviser to president-elect
Trump's transition
team.
She joins me from New York.
Welcome, Kellyanne Conway.
I want to ask you first about
the president-elect,
what he said during the
campaign.
He repeatedly called his
opponent crooked
Hillary, said she should be in
jail, and his
crowds yelled "Lock her up."
Now he says he doesn't want to
see the Clintons
hurt.
If that's the way he felt, why
so much focus
on putting her in jail?
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior
Adviser: Judy,
it doesn't change the fact that
a majority
of the country finds Hillary
Clinton to be
neither honest nor trustworthy.
She does have that veracity
problem with the
people.
That was very clear.
I think it's one of the reasons
she wasn't
elected president and he was.
But he also, as president-elect,
has made
very clear, including today in
an on-the-record
meeting with The New York Times
that I attended,
he made very clear that he
thinks that Hillary
Clinton has suffered enough and
that he's
looking toward the future and
not the past.
So at this moment, he's saying
he has no interest
in pursuing these allegations or
these charges.
And I think that, you know, for
those who
are also asking for him to be
the president
of all Americans, to help heal a
divided nation,
they ought to be happy to hear
what his words
are today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Something else
Mr. Trump was
emphatic about during the
campaign was undoing
the Paris climate change accord.
And to The New York Times today,
it's reported
that he said he's open now to
what decision
to make on that.
But isn't it the case that, with
that accord,
you either sign it or you don't,
that there's
no compromise?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, he also
said today
-- I was sitting right there,
Judy -- he said:
I'm going to take a look at it.
And he will when he's president.
He will take a look at it and he
will make
his decision.
He's well aware of the Paris
climate accords
and what it means if you agree
or you don't
agree to it.
It's pretty unequivocal, as you
note.
But there was a longer
conversation about
climate change.
there was a longer conversation
about the
many different issues, frankly.
But he said, I will take a look
at it.
That's what a responsible leader
does.
They assume office, consult with
their experts
and make decisions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We learned,
Kellyanne Conway,
the president-elect has had two
phone calls,
I think he said, with President
Obama since
he met with him the week of the
election.
Can you tell us how long those
calls lasted
and what they talked about?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, they
weren't as long
as the 90-minute meeting that
President Obama
and president-elect Trump had in
the Oval
Office when he visited recently,
Judy.
But they have had a couple of
follow-up conversations.
I think the country should be
happy about
that.
They both have a vested interest
in a peaceful
transition in our great
democracy.
And president-elect Trump said
today again
on the record that President
Obama has been
very gracious to him, very
helpful.
They had a conversation or two
about specific
issues.
And, in fact, in the case of one
issue which
sounded like it had global
implications, Mr.
Trump refused to elaborate.
It basically was a conversation
among presidents.
And I think we as a people, we
as the voters
and citizens, have to respect
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I have a couple
of -- several
questions for you, Kellyanne
Conway.
I want to call them quick-answer
questions,
because there is so much to talk
about.
But starting with the Affordable
Care Act,
there have been a number of
prominent Republican
members of Congress in the last
few days who've
said that they -- now that they
have looked
at it, they think that this
should be done
over several years, the repeal
of it, the
change of it, because they don't
want to disrupt
insurance markets.
Is the president open to that,
president-elect
open to that?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: The --
president-elect Trump
has made very clear that he
intends to repeal
and replace Obamacare, and
replace it with
what, Judy?
He said that you can actually
purchase health
insurance across state lines,
much the way
you would auto insurance, for
example, and
many foods and services.
You're not restricted to one
state.
I think, in a free market,
patient-centered
health care system, you would
want that to
happen.
Second, we would block-grant
Medicaid to the
states, so those that are
closest to the people
who would receive Medicaid are
those making
the decisions about that.
Third, health savings accounts
for all Americans,
so that you control more of that
spending.
It rolls over and it may, in
fact, accrue
interest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: But you're
more personally,
intimately in charge of the
spending for these
personal, intimate health care
decisions.
And I think also, through his
tax reform plan,
getting rid of that Obamacare,
Affordable
Care Act penalty, where you
basically are
forced between two bad choices,
either buy
the government-run health
insurance or pay
the penalty.
So, he's going to do some very
specific things.
He has a Republican House and
Senate that
will help him do that.
There are also some things
within the system
that he may want to preserve if
they're working,
if he and his experts decide
these are working
and these are worth retaining.
He's not here to hurt people.
He's here to make better on the
promise that
was never really fulfilled
through this Affordable
Care Act, which is to have
affordable, accessible,
quality, ridden with choices,
and access and
good access for all health
insurance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just ask
you a few other
short-answer questions.
One of the other things that the
president-elect
talked about in the campaign is
no changes
in entitlements, Social
Security, Medicare
and so forth.
In the last few days, Speaker
Paul Ryan, though,
has talked about changing
Medicare into a
premium support system,
partially privatizing
it.
Is this something Mr. Trump
would be open
to doing?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: So,
President-elect Trump
has made very clear he wants to
make good
on the promises that we as a
nation have made
to the seniors who rely upon
Medicare and
certainly the lower-income
Americans who rely
upon Medicaid and other
entitlements like
Social Security, frankly, for
those who receive
that.
At the same time, he is open to
hearing different
solutions and better ways of
doing things.
He will, I'm sure, take a look
at Speaker
Ryan's proposal and other
proposals.
He's somebody I know well who is
a great listener
and learner and really does pull
together
a multitude of counselors and
try to rely
on best practices.
But he's also a doer.
He is not somebody who pushes
paper or kicks
the can down the road.
He's an accountable -- he's a
businessman.
He's used to accountability,
results, delivery,
and performance.
And I think in this case, he
will go ahead
and look at alternatives, Judy,
as long as
it doesn't interfere with what
he has said,
his commitment to keep the
promises to those
currently relying on them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We also saw today
in his talk
with The New York Times that Mr.
Trump distanced
himself from the so-called
alt-right.
But people look at the rhetoric
during the
campaign, the nationalist
rhetoric, tough
language about immigrants, about
Muslims.
This has resonated with
nationalist groups
like the alt-right.
Are there regrets on his part,
on the part
of the people around him about
how heated
the language got and extreme
during the campaign?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Judy, he could
not be more
firm and more unequivocal in his
disavowal
of those elements.
He's never asked them to be at
his rallies
to support him, to "endorse him"
-- quote,
unquote.
He has been very clear in
disavowing them,
and he did it again today again
at The New
York Times.
He was asked two separate
questions about
that particular issue.
And I think assigning to him
everything that's
ever been said or done by
anybody who says
they support him is truly
unfair.
I didn't hear Hillary Clinton
being asked
again and again if she agreed
with many people
shouting out that those pigs
should fry, let's
smell the bacon frying,
referring to our honored
men and women in blue, our law
enforcement
officers.
And so he cannot be more
emphatic and unequivocal
about distancing himself from
and denouncing
the rhetoric of and the policies
of this element
of society.
So, I don't know what else he
can do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I guess the
question is,
could he be more forceful right
now in personally
denouncing some of the hate
crimes that are
taking place, acts of violence,
of disrespect
toward people, toward
minorities, Muslims,
children, African-American,
Hispanic children?
As you know, there's been a rise
in these
incidents since the election.
Couldn't Mr. Trump say something
to try to
persuade the individuals
responsible for this
to stop?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: He has.
And I assure you he feels that
way in an ongoing
fashion.
So, you can assure yourself that
he is denouncing
it on a daily basis, on a
constant basis.
He also told CBS' "60 Minutes,"
he told them
to cut it out when he was asked
a similar
question about 10 days ago.
So everybody should know where
he stands on
this.
The other thing is that, you
know, I hope
there's a lot of coverage of the
protesters
against him.
We were 20,000-strong right
outside our door
here in Trump Tower about 10 or
11 days ago,
Judy, and it wasn't a
comfortable situation.
You had people -- you have
people wishing
him harm.
You have the threats towards him
and his family
and those of us around him on
the rise.
We just don't talk about it.
And so I think everybody ought
to take the
temperature down a few notches
and, frankly,
take the example of Donald Trump
and Barack
Obama and Joe Biden and Mike
Pence and so
many others, who are saying, let
this guy
form his government, give him a
chance, because
#heisyourpresident.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just finally,
to the children
of undocumented immigrants in
this country,
who we see, through reporting
over the last
few weeks, are now saying
they're living in
fear that their parents are
going to be deported,
their families are going to be
torn apart,
what is Mr. Trump's message to
these children?
Will the president -- will he --
let me just
ask this.
Will he undo President Obama's
executive order
on the children of undocumented
immigrants?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: So, I think
there are fewer
issues where president-elect
Donald Trump
could have been more clear than
he was on
immigration the whole time
during his candidacy.
He put out a 10-point plan that
addressed
all this.
He wants people to be here
legally.
He wants to respect the fact
that folks are
standing in line and it takes
them many, many
years and different processes
and, in many
instances, Judy, a whole bunch
of money for
people that are giving up such a
high percentage
of their disposable income to
try to become
American citizens.
The process must be respected.
The rule of law must be honored.
And he says -- he tells them all
the time,
if you are a good person, if you
are here
and you would like to stay here,
you would
like to come back here, that
they're not who
he's talking about when he says
we're first
going to get rid of the two
million or so
-- people don't really know the
exact number
-- of the criminals who don't
belong here
to begin with.
They will be out immediately.
Then he is going to secure the
border.
He's going to build the wall.
He said Mexico will pay for it.
And then he's going to take a
look at who's
here and decide -- he's made
this very clear
-- and decide, with his experts,
what should
happen.
But, you know, for those saying
they live
in fear, again, I think they
should be part
of the conversation.
They should reach out and try to
not be so
presumptively accusatory,
frankly, or presumptively
negative towards the
president-elect, and
instead try to build that
trusting relationship
and try to, frankly, explain
their case to
him and to his advisers in a way
that I know
he's open to hearing.
But he's made very clear he
wants the rule
of law honored.
These sanctuary cities have to
stop.
They lead to the murders of
people, all these
innocent kids.
What about those angel moms and
dads?
What about their children, Kate
Steinle, and
the angel moms that went all
around for us,
Julie and Angela?
And these women are -- they're
suffering in
a way that can never be healed
either, all
because of the leftist policies
of sanctuary
cities harboring illegal
immigrants who have
committed crimes and shouldn't
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kellyanne Conway,
adviser,
senior adviser to
president-elect Donald Trump,
we thank you.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Thank you,
Judy.
All the best.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
the Democrats
and their path ahead.
Congressman Tim Ryan of Ohio is
making a bid
to be minority leader in the
House of Representatives,
challenging the current minority
leader, Nancy
Pelosi.
He joins us from Youngstown.
Congressman, thank you for being
with us.
We did just speak with Kellyanne
Conway, advising
the president-elect.
And it does sound as if he may
be more amenable
to working with Democrats,
working with moderates
in his own party than we thought
during the
election.
How much do you think you and
other Democrats
are prepared to work with him?
REP.
TIM RYAN (D), Ohio: Well, we
have to see.
You know, I have been around
long enough now,
Judy, to know that the devil is
in the details.
And we want to see actual
proposals.
And, sometimes, the rhetoric,
whether it hardens
or softens throughout the course
of a post-election
a few weeks, is always revealed
by the details
of the proposals.
So we're respectful of what the
American people
have done, although we may not
like it, and
we have an obligation to sit
down and at least
listen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In brief, how
would your agenda
for the Democrats differ from
that of Leader
Pelosi's?
REP.
TIM RYAN: Well, I think it's an
idea of emphasis,
really.
We have not focused on the
economic issues
that are so important to people
in working-class
places like Youngstown, Ohio.
You look at what happened on
election night.
Our economic message clearly
isn't penetrating.
I think we need to be focused on
these folks
who live in areas like mine
where the median
household income is $57,000 a
year, which
means a husband and wife are
working and each
making under 30 grand.
They don't see the Democratic
Party as a home
for them, and they left us in
droves on Tuesday
night.
And now we're left to clean up
the mess, and
I think the issue really is, how
do you connect
to those voters?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
saying the Democrats'
message has been the wrong one,
or they just
had the wrong messengers in
Hillary Clinton
and Nancy Pelosi, among others?
REP.
TIM RYAN: Well, our party has
become a coastal
party, and that was revealed
again on Tuesday,
where the middle of the country
is red and
we have blue on the coasts.
And that is no way to sustain a
national party.
And so I think it has been the
messengers,
it has been the message.
The people in Middle America
think that the
Democrats are too close to the
donor class,
and that they care more about
the donor class
than they do about the working
class.
So, we have to change that, or
we're never
going to get back into the
majority, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We know that
experts who look
at the loss of blue-collar
manufacturing jobs
in this country over the past
decade or more
say that, yes, some of these
jobs can come
back, but many of them will not
come back
because of automation, because
of robotics,
because of globalization.
Is there a danger in misleading
voters about
that?
REP.
TIM RYAN: I don't think it's
misleading them
at all.
I think it's being there with
them, understanding
their issues.
Yes, the low-end manufacturing,
it is not
coming back.
And I think we're lying to the
American people
if we say they are coming back.
But there is a huge opportunity
in advanced
manufacturing with regard to
aerospace or
wind turbines, where the average
wind turbine
has about 8,000 component parts,
gear shifts,
hydraulics, bolts, aluminum.
Those are things that we can
make in communities
like mine and other communities
in the Great
Lake states.
So, a focus on renewable energy
really is
about a resuscitation of our
manufacturing
base, all the while trying to
create those
new high-tech jobs in the maker
movement,
in additive manufacturing, which
is projected
to grow at 25 percent a year for
the next
10 years, but getting our work
force in front
of these areas of the economy
that are going
to grow, but, at the same time,
recognizing,
Judy, that there's a lot of
people in communities
that don't want to get retrained
to run a
computer.
They want to run a backhoe and
they want to
sling cement blocks.
And so by rebuilding the country
through a
strong infrastructure program,
we could put
those people back to work, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned --
you talked
about the Democrats becoming a
party of the
coasts, that the rest of the
country has been
overlooked.
It's also been said by Democrats
themselves
the party has been too much into
what they
call identity politics, paying
attention to
particular groups,
African-Americans, Hispanics,
the LGBT community, certain
groups of women,
and so on.
Do you think that's a problem
for the Democratic
Party?
And if you do, what do you do
about it?
REP.
TIM RYAN: I don't think they're
mutually exclusive.
I think we have a role and
responsibility,
especially after the kind of
campaign we just
came through, to make sure that
we are going
to vigorously fight for equality
for all Americans.
And those issues are very, very
important
to us.
But the heart of our party has
to be a message
that unites the entire party and
unites independents
and Republicans maybe to come
our way.
And that message is a strong,
robust economic
message.
I mean, you look at Trump and
why he won,
he had all these issues that a
lot of people
maybe didn't want to talk about
or maybe didn't
agree with him on, but his
economic message
was so robust that it won the
day, and it
won the day big time.
And so we better get back to a
robust economic
message about the future, what's
the future
look like, what's the future of
work, where
do we have to make investments,
where are
the public-private partnerships,
the business incubators, where's
the research.
Those are Democratic issues.
We know how to do this much
better than the
Republicans.
But we have got to focus on it
and let everyone
know, whether you're a
millennial or a middle-class
person in places like
Youngstown, Ohio, that
you're going to have an
opportunity in a Democratic
economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman Tim
Ryan, running
for minority leader in the House
of Representatives,
we thank you.
As the wars in Iraq and Syria
continue, Europe
is on a high state of alert, on
guard against
fleeing foreign fighters
attempting to slip
back into their home or adoptive
countries.
With Britain's state of alert
severe, the
mother of one young British
fighter killed
in Syria has launched a
deradicalization project
as part of her personal war
against the Islamic
State.
Malcolm Brabant reports from
Birmingham.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nicola Benyahia
leafs through
a box of childhood memories.
NICOLA BENYAHIA, Mother of
Killed ISIS Fighter:
Look at his little picture
there.
MALCOLM BRABANT: They were left
by her 19-year-old
son, Rasheed, when he slipped
away to Syria
to join Islamic State.
It included a letter foretelling
his death.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: "Death can
strike at any
time.
Give all my money to mama.
My bank card is in the case of
my phone.
Remember me in your prayers, and
remember
that death will take everyone.
Now is the time to turn to God.
I love you all for the sake of
God.
Remember to treat mama and papa
with respect
and honor.
Rasheed."
MALCOLM BRABANT: Almost exactly
a year ago,
Rasheed Benyahia's father
received a call
to say his son had been killed
in a drone
strike on the Syrian-Iraqi
border.
In the run-up to his death, the
teenager had
been clingy in Internet
conversations with
his mother, which she has
preserved in a small
book.
Both sensed the end was near.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: I was waiting
for that call
to say that he was dead.
And part of me wanted that call,
almost, like,
to end the nightmare, to end it.
It was -- and I used to catch
myself thinking,
how can you, as a mother, want
that call?
But, on the other hand, I wanted
the nightmare
to end.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For him or for
you?
NICOLA BENYAHIA: For him and me.
I felt I was caught in a
nightmare that I
had no choosing of.
I felt he was caught in a
situation that he
had absolutely no power over.
He couldn't get out.
He didn't have his passport.
They'd taken it from him.
So I knew that, even if he
changed his mind,
he was stuck.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Rasheed was
brought up in
a liberal household by his
Algerian father
and mother, Nicola, a British
convert to Islam.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: Aggression and
Rasheed are
just two words that don't go
together.
Violence wasn't something that
was in him.
I don't think I ever saw him,
even as a child,
lash out.
That's why it's more shocking
when I found
out that he had actually gone to
join ISIS,
and knowing the atrocities that
they were
kind of carrying out.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mrs. Benyahia
believes her
son was radicalized at
Birmingham's Green
Lane mosque.
The police didn't wish to
discuss Green Lane's
involvement, and the mosque
didn't respond
to a request for an interview.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: He began going
to a new mosque
that had some sort of, kind of
quite orthodox,
and, I would say, quite extreme
kind of thinking
in Islam.
That's when I could see the
change within
Rasheed.
MAN: We're here in the 17th
division military
base, just outside the city of
Al Raqqa.
And we're here with the soldiers
of Bashar.
You can see them now digging
their own graves
in the very place where they
were stationed.
MALCOLM BRABANT: During his time
with Islamic
State, the family asked whether
he had participated
in atrocities, but he only said
he'd only
been a witness.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: It was a public
beheading
that had taken place, and
basically they were
forced to watch it, because
they're made to
watch these things, one, to
desensitize them,
and, secondly, to -- as a
warning to them
that, if they're thinking about
possibly leaving
or changing their minds, that
this is what
could happen to them as well.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As Islamic
State's strongholds
of Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in
Syria come under
increased military pressure,
there are concerns
that jihadis who don't wish to
fight to the
death will try to slip away and
return home
to places like Birmingham.
Along with most other European
countries,
Britain is having to live with
the ever-present
threat of terrorism.
According to the country's new
anti-terrorism
coordinator, the authorities
have managed
to thwart 10 potential attacks
over the past
two years.
And at any given time, there are
supposed
to be about 500 live
investigations under
way.
The authorities say there are
about 850 Britons
who are a security concern
who've gone to
fight in Syria, about half of
those have returned
to the country, and about one in
three of
those are living in the
Birmingham area.
Britain's current security level
is severe,
which means an attack is likely.
SUE SOUTHERN, West Midlands
Counter Terrorism
Unit: What has happened in
Europe could play
out anywhere within the U.K.
That's a real threat that we all
face.
We're alive to that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Sue Southern
heads the anti-terrorist
unit in the Birmingham region.
She's prepared for returning
jihadis.
SUE SOUTHERN: We are ready, and
in some cases
we already have evidence
waiting.
And we will deal with people
proportionately,
but they will be arrested.
We will investigate that.
And we will treat each case on
its own merits.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Birmingham is
one of Britain's
most diverse cities, and
moderate Muslims
use the main street to try to
counter misunderstanding
and extremism.
Hamza Ali Khan opposes those who
go to fight
in Syria or Iraq.
HAMZA ALI KHAN, British Muslim:
God will not
ask you to go to a country to
commit such
atrocities.
When they go to such countries
such as Syria,
they go with the intention of
causing bad,
killing innocent
people.
God says in the Koran, in our
Koran, in our
holy book that if you were to
kill someone,
it was as if you have killed the
entire world,
and if you were to save someone,
it's as though
you have saved the entire world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Amid the street
musicians
and shoppers, there is an air of
vigilance,
and Toby Ephram from Southern
Sudan is doing
his bit by trying to counter the
propaganda
of Islamic State.
TOBY EPHRAM, Ahmadiyya Muslim
Association:
The fact I can tell the world
today there
is no verse in the Koran that
somebody will
die by destroying himself,
destroying the
innocent people and then to
think that God
is going to give him a red
carpet by having
75 virgins, that is a wrong
concept.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Dr. Imran
Awan, a criminologist
at Birmingham City University,
doubts the
effectiveness of using theology
alone.
DR.
IMRAN AWAN, Birmingham City
University: Primarily,
I don't think mosques are in
touch with a
lot of the younger people.
And I think what needs to happen
is, in a
sense, get them onto a digital
platform.
So, I call it a digital
revolution, where
mosques and imam leaders are
online and on
the Internet.
And I think they need to flood
the Internet
with countermessaging and sort
of counter
the ISIS propaganda.
I think that's a huge role.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But a string of
anti-I.S.
videos is starting to appear.
MAN: We are hope.
And we are action against
division, against
violence, against death.
This is our fate and our future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dr. Awan has
suggested that
repentant jihadis returning to
Britain could
be turned by the authorities to
help deradicalization
programs.
Is that something that you would
consider?
SUE SOUTHERN: I don't dispute
that there is
absolute value in being able to
use the experiences
of others to deter others.
But what we have to be clear
about is that,
if an individual has traveled
and has gained
the type of training and
capability and comes
back with the I.S. narrative,
which is anti-West
and attack those in the West, we
have a duty
to protect the citizens of the
U.K., both
here and overseas.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After keeping a
low profile
since her son's death, Nicola
Benyahia, in
the head scarf, has joined other
mothers present
at this conference in Paris in
publicly fighting
against Islamic State.
She believes that, as a Muslim,
she might
perhaps succeed where the police
and other
organizations might not be
trusted by families
of children on the verge of
radicalization.
NICOLA BENYAHIA: Maybe that
anger is, I'm
using it as a strength to kind
of hit back
at them, and say, no, you are
not taking any
more of our children.
I don't think a mother can hate
them as much
when they have taken the one
thing, a child,
from you.
And I will do everything in my
power, as a
mother, as a professional,
whatever I can,
to fight against them and give
our young people
a different narrative.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nicola Benyahia
worries she
might be rejected by the Muslim
community
for raising a taboo issue that
is often only
discussed behind closed doors,
but she wants
to save other families from
similar pain,
so that some good can come from
her son's
death.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Birmingham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the power of
the great
outdoors.
Reporter Kavitha Cardoza from
our partners
at Education Week looks at a
program to expose
students to our national parks.
It's part of our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
ARACELY MONTERO, National Park
Service: Nice
big circle.
Come on in.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fourth graders
from Pennycook
Elementary School will soon see
something
they have never seen before.
ARACELY MONTERO: So, welcome to
the Redwood
Forest, everyone.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Even though
they live in
Oakland, just 45 minutes away,
most have never
been to a national park.
You might call it a sensory
experience.
ARACELY MONTERO, National Park
Service: Aaron,
can you tell us, what is another
way we can
observe nature?
STUDENT: Like, with our nose?
ARACELY MONTERO: With our noses.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Ranger Aracely
Montero leads
the tour.
The children approach the first
stand of redwoods.
ARACELY MONTERO: We are now
inside of the
magical forest of Muir Woods.
STUDENT: Oh, my God.
ARACELY MONTERO: Everyone, take
a good look
up.
STUDENT: Whoa.
ARACELY MONTERO: We're now
standing under
one of the tallest living things
in the world.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: In this
classroom, students
use all their senses.
STUDENT: This one feels thick.
WOMAN: It feels really thick,
doesn't it?
STUDENT: It smells like salt.
WOMAN: Look up there.
Those are clusters of ladybugs.
STUDENT: It's like a whole
country of them.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Teacher Darlene
Wong says
that place-based learning,
having children
learn by experiencing subjects,
rather than
simply reading about them,
teaches skills
like critical thinking.
DARLENE WONG, Teacher: Show me
your evidence.
What evidence do you have to
prove what you're
saying or what you're writing
here?
STUDENT: Whoa.
That's so big.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The National
Park Service's
educational programs serve
approximately seven
million children every year.
Rangers conduct teacher
workshops, go on classroom
visits, and, perhaps most
importantly, create
curriculum for these trips based
on state
standards.
This class is learning about
California habitats.
WOMAN: Ooh, look what I found.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Without these
programs, Wong
says she couldn't have brought
her class to
the forest.
DARLENE WONG: In terms of
testing and what
we have to cover in terms of
curriculum and
time, it's really -- it would be
really hard
to justify it.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Julia Washburn
went from
junior ranger...
JULIA WASHBURN, National Park
Service: It
still fits.
STUDENT: It still fits.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: ... to park
ranger.
Now she oversees all educational
programs
for the National Park Service.
JULIA WASHBURN: It's one thing
to read about
a wetland, for example, in a
textbook.
And it's a very different thing
to be standing
up to your thighs in mud in a
swamp or in
a wetland, such as the
Everglades.
It just really makes the
learning tangible
and very relevant, so students
can understand
why they're learning something,
not just what
they're learning.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The source of
the excitement?
Long-legged bugs called water
striders.
What's not as easily seen are
the challenges
facing the Park Service.
Budgets are down.
There's 10 percent fewer staff
than five years
ago, and the next generation of
park visitors
is uncertain.
Using national parks as
classrooms isn't just
about learning.
It's also about growing the next
generation
of park visitors.
GRACE LEE, Executive Director,
National Park
Trust: If we don't engage young
people of
color right now with our parks,
then, 100
years from now, we are very
concerned that
there won't be the celebration
of the 200th
anniversary of the National Park
Service.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Grace Lee heads
the National
Park Trust.
They raise money for 20,000 kids
to visit
parks every year.
GRACE LEE: They have been
studies that have
done recently that have shown,
of the almost
300 million people that have
gone to national
parks in the last couple of
years each year,
that a very small percentage of
them are young
people, and even a smaller
percentage of them
are children of color.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fifty years
ago, the National
Park Service partnered with AAA
and Chevrolet
to reach returning World War II
veterans and
their families, creating the
generation of
park users we see today.
Aging baby boomers remain the
largest percentage
of park visitors overall.
JONATHAN JARVIS, Director,
National Park Service:
What we're feeling now is that
there's a new
generation that is more urban,
more diverse.
Maybe they are first-generation
immigrants
to the United States,
first-generation citizens.
Maybe they came from a country
that didn't
have public lands or parks or a
tradition
of that.
And so we are reaching the kids
and they're
bringing their parents to the
parks.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jon Jarvis, the
director
of the National Park Service,
says America's
parks must tell the country's
evolving story.
JONATHAN JARVIS: Filling in the
gaps, as I
would say, in the American
narrative.
We have added sites for civil
rights, like
Harriet Tubman.
We added Stonewall, which tells
the story
of the LGBT civil rights
movement as well.
We need to be telling that
story, so that
all Americans feel part of the
patriotic and
symbolic values that this nation
embodies.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jarvis says
they have also
embraced technology, Webcams,
online chats,
even video games.
National Park sites are actually
Pokemon GO
sites?
JONATHAN JARVIS: They are.
They are.
The Pokemon GO community has
spread these
little monsters all over the
National Park
Service, and we're embracing
that, because
it's getting people outside and
getting -- using
technology in a way that sort of
connects
them to these places.
STUDENT: Whoa.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Here in the
Redwood Forest,
these 10-year-olds have found
something better
than Pokemon GO characters.
STUDENT: Turkeys.
STUDENT: Gobble, gobble.
JONATHAN JARVIS: The evidence
shows that when
kids are exposed to the place,
they learn,
they retain, they become more
interested and
more excited about learning.
STUDENT: Whoa.
WOMAN: How do you feel right
now?
STUDENT: Being in the Redwood
Forest makes
me feel happy.
STUDENT: Being in the Redwood
Forest makes
me want to meditate.
STUDENT: Being in the Redwood
Forest makes
me feel short.
(LAUGHTER)
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The director of
the Park
Service hopes that using parks
as classrooms
is just the beginning.
JONATHAN JARVIS: What I wanted
to do was to
say that the National Park
Service is a contributor
to American education, both for
students,
but for lifelong learning as
well.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Kavitha
Cardoza, reporting
from the Golden Gate National
Recreation Area
in California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to a preview
of the second
half of the PBS miniseries
"Black America
Since MLK," and to Jeffrey
Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: The series
subtitle is "And
Still I Rise."
And, as that suggests, it
focuses on the progress
and continuing struggles of
African-Americans
since the civil rights movement.
It's both cultural history and a
personal
journey told by Harvard
Professor Henry Louis
Gates, who joins me now.
And, Skip Gates, welcome back to
you.
HENRY LOUIS GATES, Professor,
Harvard University:
Thank you.
Nice to be back on the program.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the
introduction of this,
you say, "As a young man, I was
convinced
the change was right around the
corner."
Well, it was and it wasn't.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: It was and it
wasn't.
I was 15 in 1965, which is where
the series
starts.
And the conceit of the series is
this.
If Martin Luther King came back
and said,
what's happened since I have
been gone, what
would you tell him?
What's happened to the black
community?
Well, you would say, well, Dr.
King, the black
middle class since 1970 has
doubled.
The black upper middle class,
because of something
called affirmative action, has
quadrupled.
And Dr. King would say, my God,
we must have
solved poverty, the problem of
poverty -- because
remember, at the time when Dr.
King passed,
people thought poverty was a
virus which could
be cured with antibiotics.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: They really
thought poverty
could be wiped out, that it was
an act of
will.
So, you would say, well, Dr.
King, we haven't
wiped out poverty, because the
child poverty
rate in 1970 was 41 percent.
He would say, what is it now?
Thirty-eight percent.
So, what does that mean?
For the black community, it's
the best of
times, it's the worst of times.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's look at a
clip from tonight's
episode, which looks at the
simultaneous explosion
of black celebrity and middle
class.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: Oprah
embodied a new era,
an era of black crossover
superstars.
From Michael Jackson to Bill
Cosby, Michael
Jordan to Whitney Houston,
African-Americans
were winning fame and fortune in
ways that
would have been unimaginable
even a decade
before.
TINA TURNER, Actress/Musician:
Listen to me.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: And their
success encouraged
America to think differently
about race.
VINCENT BROWN, Harvard
University: What happens
is that I think white people can
now suddenly
imagine themselves identifying
with black
success in a new way.
What that means is that, if you
happen to
be famous, right, then we will
accept you
into our society as a rough
equal, maybe even
a better.
ACTOR: How about a little
one-on-one?
MICHAEL JORDAN, Former NBA
Player: All right.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: Black success
wasn't confined
to the realm of celebrities.
African-Americans were making
dramatic gains
in almost every arena.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, that
astonishing rise of
a culture and political presence
of blacks
in America, how important was it
overall or
has it been to overall progress?
HENRY LOUIS GATES: Oh, it was
crucial.
And it's a result of affirmative
action.
When I went to Yale, I entered
Yale in 1969.
Ninety-six black kids entered
that year, as
opposed to six in 1966.
What, was there a genetic blip
in the race,
and all of a sudden there were
90 smart black
people who hadn't existed
before?
So, we were the affirmative
action generation.
We were there and we were part
of this transformative
element that integrated
historically white
institutions in the power
structure, which
is what we were supposed to do.
But what happened?
Lani Guinier, my colleague at
Harvard, used
to say that affirmative action
was a class
escalator.
So, we were on that class
escalator, and we
were going up the social and
economic scale
in the United States, and
somebody hit the
off switch.
All those people who hadn't
gotten on the
escalator when we did were left
behind.
So, we have a class gap within
the race.
We have a huge class gap.
So, part of the reason I did
this series was
to remind those of us who
benefited from affirmative
action and who have done so well
over the
last 50 years that there is
still a huge segment
of African-Americans left
behind.
JEFFREY BROWN: To what extent do
you see the
campaign and the results as a
repudiation
of the black presence in our
culture and in
our politics, or even a backlash
against it?
HENRY LOUIS GATES: I think that
the Trump
vote, particularly among the
working class,
is a reflection of economic
anxiety.
People are afraid.
It used to be, if you deferred
gratification,
you kept your nose
metaphorically clean, like
the people in my hometown did,
all of whom
worked at the paper mill, you
would one day
get a mortgage, you would buy
one car, you
would get two cars, you would
get a couple
TVs, and then you would send
your kids to
college.
And your kids would do better
than you.
Well, that's no longer the case
for a lot
of people.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, where are we
in the saga
of what you're telling Dr. King
many years
later?
HENRY LOUIS GATES: I think I
would say, Dr.
King, the jury is out, and there
is a great
deal of anxiety within the
African-American
community, within the Democratic
Party, within
liberal states like my state,
the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, about the
vulnerability
of the gains that we have made.
What happens if, in the next
four years, the
vacancy, one vacancy, two
vacancies on the
court?
What will happen to voting
rights?
What will happen to a woman's
right to choose
an abortion within Roe v. Wade,
et cetera,
et cetera?
I'm very worried about that.
And we have to be vigilant and
we're going
to fight.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
series is "Black
America Since MLK: And Still I
Rise."
Henry Louis Gates, thank you
very much.
HENRY LOUIS GATES: Thank you
JUDY WOODRUFF: And "Black
America Since MLK:
And Still I Rise" airs tonight
on PBS at 8:00
Eastern, 7:00 Central.
Finally tonight: Twenty-one
people received
the Presidential Medal of
Freedom this year,
from artists and entertainers,
to philanthropists
and scientists.
President Obama handed out the
medals at the
White House this afternoon.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Extraordinary Americans who have
lifted our
spirits, strengthened our union,
pushed us
towards progress.
These two have donated more
money to charitable
causes than anyone ever.
Many years ago, Melinda's mom
told her an
old saying: To know that even
one life has
breathed easier because you have
lived, that
is success.
By this and just about any other
measure,
few in human history have been
more successful
than these two impatient
optimists.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Ellen DeGeneres
has a way of
making you laugh about some
thing, rather
than at someone, except when I
danced on her
show.
She laughed at me.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: But that's OK.
It's easy to forget now, when we
have come
so far, where now marriage is
equal under
the law, just how much courage
was required
for Ellen to come out on the
most public of
stages almost 20 years ago.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Now, every
journalist in the
room, every media knows the
phrase Newt Minow
coined: the vast wasteland.
But the two words Newt prefers
we remember
from his speech to the nation's
broadcasters
are these: public interest.
That's been the heartbeat of his
life's work.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: The game of
baseball has a handful
of signature sounds.
You hear the crack of the bat.
You have got the crowd singing
in the seventh
inning stretch.
And you have got the voice of
Vin Scully.
When he heard about this honor,
Vin asked,
with characteristic humility,
"Are you sure?
I'm just an old baseball
announcer."
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: And we had to
inform him that,
to Americans of all ages, you
are an old friend.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Here's how great
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
was; 1967, he had spent a year
dominating
college basketball.
The NCAA bans the dunk.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: They didn't say it
was about
Kareem, but it was about Kareem.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: There's a reason
you call somebody
the Michael Jordan of -- Michael
Jordan of
neurosurgery, or the Michael
Jordan of rabbis,
or the Michael Jordan of
outrigger canoeing.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: Because Michael
Jordan is the
Michael Jordan of greatness.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: I am the
president.
He is the Boss.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: And pushing 70, he
is still
laying down four-hour live sets.
If you have not been at them, he
is working,
fire-breathing rock 'n' roll.
So, I thought twice about giving
him a medal
named for freedom, because we
hope he remains,
in his words, a prisoner of rock
'n' roll
for years to come.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: What a
star-studded group.
The Medal of Freedom winners
marked the occasion
with a star-studded mannequin
challenge.
You can watch that on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.